---
layout: post
category: generalblog
title: "Why I Stopped Trying to Publish my Journal Article"
date: 2023-11-04 21:03:36 +0530
---
There's a pressure to publish obvious among those in graduate school considering any flavor of career in academia. The vast majority of grad students conduct research and the goal, rather than to produce valuable knowledge, is to publish *something* in the most prestigious journal possible. Adam Mastrioanni has [written](https://www.experimental-history.com/p/the-rise-and-fall-of-peer-review) about this topic [at length](https://www.experimental-history.com/p/things-could-be-better) and though I have almost no experience in academia, I thought I would add one more anecdote to the growing chorus. Perhaps that I was so exposed to the blight in such a short time is a powerful argument in support of Mastrioanni. 

I recently gave up formally trying to publish some research I did as part of my Master's Thesis, but my heart had given up before we even started. I spent at least 200 hours on this project over 2 years. The details aren't particularly important (a paper draft lies in purgatory [here](https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.05985)). I enjoyed the technical work, but I was less interested in creating the paper. I was not confident in any of the real-world claims and had no domain expertise; I was just proud of the largest software project I had ever attempted (which also lies in purgatory in the proprietary clutches of MIT Lincoln Laboratory, no link). I had learned a lot, but didn't feel that I had knowledge to share that would benefit others. I expected the work to sit in my thesis and collect dust on a shelf in an MIT library and that was good enough for me. 

My advisor, who wanted to look out for me and ensure I received proper credit for my work, pushed me to publish it. I submitted it to the first journal, who rejected and provided nice feedback. I submitted to another journal at the urging of my advisor and was again rejected. This time it wasn't nice; the journal replied with a letter containing the rage of the anonymous reviewer who had to slog through my paper. The bitterness of this academic was palpable. I imagine they were so angry because they had to dedicate so much time in service to the broken peer review system, both reading and producing shitty papers that would not matter to anyone. Whatever the case was, the response was so smug and ungenerous it reeked of  [status-income disequilibrium](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Status%E2%80%93income_disequilibrium). 

As I read about the unfolding Dan Ariely and Francesca Gino scandals, Adam Mastrioanni wrote "[it is actually a terrifying fact that you can reveal whole swaths of a scientific field to be fraudulent and it doesn't make a difference](https://www.experimental-history.com/p/im-so-sorry-for-psychologys-loss)." Now, I wasn't concerned about fraud, but I did understand that my work would add almost nothing to the literature. So why was I going through so much trouble to publish this? Why toil over something that would have no scientific impact?

It's not great how misaligned the incentives of academia are with the advancement of human knowledge. It's clear there is corruption! At Stanford, one of the most prestigious universities in the world, [the President resigned because of falsified data in his academic work](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/07/19/us/stanford-president-resigns-tessier-lavigne.html#:~:text=Following%20months%20of%20intense%20scrutiny,he%20supervised%20going%20back%20decades). Even where there is not corruption or fraud, many of these papers [are rarely cited](https://www.vox.com/2015/11/30/9820192/universities-uncited-research). What is the point of these papers we slave away to create? It's not even clear they provide a path to informing real-world decisions (see the minimum wage literature, for example). 

To close, I'll share my personal exposure to the corruption and immorality. I managed to get a different paper accepted by a journal and an advisor connected me with someone to help write it and navigate the labyrinth of the publishing process.  (The ambiguity is intentional). This person, a tenure-track professor at a flagship university, asked me, *a student*, if he could be the first author. He acknowledged that I did basically all the work and admitted that he "felt a bit awkward" but it was important for his career and "not so much for me" since I was in the Army. This dude wanted to take credit for my work and just came out and asked me. Of course I said hell no, but I wonder how often this sort of base behavior takes place. I suppose I should be grateful he asked whether to steal my work instead of just doing it.

What is the value of a Master's degree? Should it be measured in skills gained or papers published? For me, its greatest value was teaching me I should run as far as possible from academia.